after attacking Gaza for nearly five
months the Israeli Prime Minister is
focusing on Rafa Benjamin Netanyahu says
a ground offensive is vital to
eliminating Hamas and any ceasefire
would only delay the inevitable but what
about the 1.5 million Palestinians
trapped there this is Inside
Story
hello there and welcome to the program
I'm Laura Kyle Palestinians displaced by
Israel's war on Gaza have crowded into
Rafa in the south of the strip the
Israeli military had previously
described the city as a safe Zone but
daily air strikes are intensifying and a
ground offensive is planned putting 1.5
million people squarely in the line of
fire there are also reports of a
possible ceasefire deal between Israel
and Hamas however prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu says Israel's assault
on Rafa will go ahead no matter what is
there any hope for Palestinians trapped
in the city with nowhere to go and will
anything stop Israel's ground operation
we'll go to our panel in just a moment
first fin Monahan has this
report Israel's bombing of Gaza has
forced more than 1 and a half million
Palestinians to take refuge in
Rafa their living conditions are dire
there's no water or sanitation food and
basic necessities are in short supply
and diseases are spreading through the
makeshift
camps my son has contracted hepatitis
virus because of the unhealthy and
unclean conditions we are living in we
are living in a tent that cannot protect
us from cold or rain in addition the
entire surroundings are dirty the the
whole area is dirty and polluted hunger
cold and disease are devouring our
children but soon things may it even
worse Israel is determined to launch a
ground assault on the city while there's
been talk of a potential ceasefire prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu says it
would only delay the military offensive
which he says is essential to defeating
Hamas and ensuring Israeli security we
cannot leave a quarter of hamas's
terrorist Italians
intact no one would do that in the case
of fighting Isis you wouldn't leave a
quarter of Isis intact in a defined
territory you wouldn't even think about
that and you didn't America finished the
job with its allies we will finish the
job here with our brave
Soldiers the United Nations and Aid
agencies have warned a ground incursion
into Rafa would lead to civilian
deaths even Israel's biggest Ally the
United States has said now is not the
time for an assault that no attacks on
Rafa uh should uh should take place
given current circumstances and we will
keep pressing that uh we know we've
heard what Israel has said they have not
gone in to attack Rafa and we will keep
engaging and urging and pushing in that
direction to ensure that that does not
happen as ceasefire would give
Palestinians some reprieve after months
of bombardment and de
pration but if an Israeli ground
offensive does come there may be no way
for them to get out of Harm's Way vins
and Monahan Al jazer for Inside
[Music]
Story well to unpack the significance of
an attack on Rafa we've got a panel of
guests with a range of political
humanitarian and Military expertise for
you here in qatar's capital Doha we have
Akbar Shahed ammed he's a senior
diplomatic correspondent at Huff poost
he's covered US policy on Gaza since the
Obama Administration in Cairo njla shawa
is the country relations manager with
the aid agency Oxfam she's also a
resident of Gaza and in bath in the UK
Patrick buy is a senior Lector in
security at the University of bath
specializing in Warfare and
counterterrorism he's also served in the
British army in Afghanistan a very warm
welcome to all of you akar let's start
with you why is it do you think the
Netanyahu government is determined
despite the outcry from all corners of
the world to press ahead with a ground
offensive in ra
Rafa it's striking Laura it's it's a
reality that reflects the failure of
Israel's us P offensive in Gaza so far
right we're approaching six months of
this war and Israel has not been able to
meet the kind of death blow to Hamas
that they promised they would and that a
lot of the Israeli public wants them to
so that's why you see prime minister
Netanyahu saying regardless of whether
it as a ceasefire regardless of whether
it as a truce he will eventually going
into Rafa and that's because he's
arguing that's where there's Hamas
leadership that's where there is uh
there are remaining hostages and that's
why there's a huge strategic value to
Israel right Israel is saying they want
to control Gaza in a way that they never
have before they especially want to
control gaza's Southern border with
Egypt all of that puts Israel at odd
with the us as as your report mentioned
because the US is saying look you can
pursue Hamas you cannot go into a place
that you call a safe Zone that will just
worsen these this perception of ethnic
cleansing of genocide as an icj case
continues but for the Netanyahu
Administration I think there's a clear
impetus to defy the us on this and N
asbar says this is being declared a
so-called safe Zone therefore most of
the G and population is crowded into
this city that was only designed to
sustain 300,000 people we now got 1.5
million people living there mostly in
tents can you describe for us the
humanitarian situation there in
Rafa yeah I mean it's very obvious that
we are now talking about uh just another
level of extreme Devastation uh we have
been already witnessing that we have
been already warning of uh of this uh
Devastation and the human suffering uh
the the casualties but also the human
suffering that it's that this uh this
crisis has been uh unfolding
unfortunately speaking now about these
stages where things are extremely
critical at all levels um humanitarian
workers have not been able to operate um
by maybe third of their capacity
according to un reports in terms of the
staff and that the team and the
operations uh until this moment so you
would imagine after such operation how
how this would be impacted a lot of inos
and uh non non-governmental
organizations and Aid workers have been
reestablishing semi kind of structures
and and uh um stations to to operate
from Rafa now all of this will be
compromised uh again the the flow of uh
uh of of people towards any place I mean
first of all you started by saying this
is a safe Zone while we we understand
now by Israel terms what a safe zone
mean it has always been uh uh violated
and far from being safe civilians have
been hit hospitals have been hit Aid
agencies have been directly hit we know
about two at least inos offices that
were directly hit uh Aid convoys have
been hit so you are already talking
about at a very
already as a fragile and and um violated
situation so trying to imagine now
75% of the population of the Gaza Strip
is in raah what what what could be uh
any do you really need all these
panelists to tell you what to imagine if
Israel has an incursion what what is the
implication I think it's very clear that
we are going to see uh more uh more
suffering of more people especially
vulnerable uh uh people while everybody
in Gaza Strip according to all kinds of
studies and all the work that we've been
doing tells you that they are in need
every person let's let's bring na let's
bring in Patrick at this stage because
he's got direct experience of urban
Warfare and and Patrick we're not even
talking about Urban Warfare in the usual
sense here are we we're talking about a
tented City can you give us an idea of
militarily what a ground invasion into
Rafa would look
like I can I mean you know the planning
for this will be probably based around
two options and you either have a
conventional approach which is what
Israel has mainly used so far both in
the battle of the first third the battle
for Gaza City and then the battle for
can yunas which is Firepower heavy uh
and reliant on taking territory and
obviously the dentifying and destroying
uh Hamas command Bonkers and positions
and also as We Know you know uh
hospitals Etc which the Israelis view as
collateral damage and a huge amount of
Civilian casualties as a result of that
so that's the first one the second one
and an interestingly a much more
intelligence L more targeted approach of
which we've actually seen a few few uh
elements of start to develop in the
second phase of the war around Clan unus
when they started to hit Hamas leaders
individually in different places uh is
to get into a more more targeted
intelligence base Special Forces uh and
even in Touch of counterinsurgency
approach Which is less forceful and much
more targeted the Israelis actually
pioneered this after the inada in 2006
and helped the or even earlier and
helped the US pioneered against al-Qaeda
in Iraq uh you know around that time too
so they know how to do it uh but the
question is the political imperative and
these the goals it's like coming back to
what n natu says he says that there's 25
conventional battalions or something a
quarter of the conventional Italians
left and so their Reckoning is we've got
all this support after the attack
internally let's just keep rolling I
mean I I find that I understand the fear
from the Israelis of course but from a
from a western military perspective the
inability to protect civilians that's
such a scale of which the Israelis have
demonstrated is really Beyond
Comprehension to me as a former military
officer and we've seen as n mentioned
near daily bombing of Gaza despite it
being a safe Zone just on Monday night
we had eight civilians killed in a house
near the Kuwait hospital that was
targeted by an air strike do you think
the possib the the reason for these air
strikes could be that they are clearing
the way for a ground
Invasion I it's well you that's hard to
say you know absolutely without the
intelligence what they will obviously
have some sort of intelligence which is
fed to a targeting cell they'll do their
collateral damage assessment and when
the the military necessity of the target
is balance versus the collateral damage
say in the West for example when we were
in Afghanistan we wouldn't be able to
use this sort of weapon system if there
was any hope that a civilian might be
killed now Israel can say well we're
going through this process but uh our
actual weighing of how many civilians is
uh acceptable for this military Target
is different so that's what's going on
now what you would expect to see if they
launch an offensive is I would say some
more bombardment some special forces
raids some attempts to root clear and
then they'll break down uh the uh the
remaining territory around rapid
intersections and probably sequentially
go into them uh
potentially akar we've had the US very
clearly saying it will not support aafa
Invasion until it sees a clear
evacuation plan now one has been
presented now to the Israeli War cabinet
we don't know the details of that but
can we imagine as the US imagining what
the evacuation of 1.5 million civilians
would look like it's unimaginable it's
unprecedent it's unimaginable there's
not a capacity in the US government much
larger than the Israeli government and
Military within the US Aid Machinery
there isn't the capacity to imagine this
evacuation so it's it's really tough to
imagine the Israelis have a realistic
plan for this and I think that's why you
see us officials saying very openly in a
way they haven't the rhetoric has
certainly shifted right openly the I
saying Israel you cannot do this you've
seen them say this in Washington but
also importantly in New York at the
United Nations right where the US is now
talking about a temporary ceasefire for
the first time ever and I think that's
because of the Strategic implications of
AAA offensive the humanarian tool would
be undoubtedly huge right but let's
think about a region that's already on a
knife's edge let's think about the fact
that Ramadan is now less than 2 weeks
away tensions are really high extremely
high in the occupied West Bank as well
extremely high in Jerusalem and the US
is looking at that picture and thinking
if Raa becomes this Blood B that it's
almost certain to become whenever they
go in when that happens what how do how
does the region react right how do Iran
and its proxies react the US has a
feeling strategy towards the houis and
Yemen right the US is concerned about
hisbah and Lebanon how does everyone
react to this right now Israel and the
US don't have answers to that and I
think what's critical there is is just
when will the US decide to use its
leverage in terms of actual military and
intelligence support we know they're
providing for this campaign when will
that be called into question rather than
just having a rhetorical shift
absolutely because n at what point is
Israel going to listen to World opinion
anyway I mean it has the ability we've
seen to stomach extraordinary collateral
damage and it does just seem to be
forging ahead with the most extreme
right-wing views in the Netanyahu
government who clear do want to go into
Rafa who want to go in right and who who
have a narrative that we've seen very
very openly from this government saying
not only do we want to you know punish
Palestinians wholesale right for the
actions of Hamas but we want to take
full control of Gaza right you've seen
them use this phrase from The River To
The Sea which ironically uh Israel
supporters don't want Israel critics
using but they are saying that so that
means they have to kind of have this
huge f um I think what's what's critical
to remember there is the US and Israel
will be paying the price for this for
months and years and decades to come
right so while Israel can summer the
criticism today and finish its operation
and say you know what we're done what
does this mean for Israel's ability to
survive in the region for the next 5 10
15 20 years I think that's the really
scary question well let's just put that
to Patrick I mean say the US pulled the
plug on its weapons delivery today how
much longer could it
continue actually you know what I want
to pick up on is is the last
contributor's Point first which is you
know he's exactly right I think Israel
is starting to lose sight of the
Strategic situation here uh in favor of
the operational yeah and it's alienating
people in the west it is happening now
that it needs yeah H it's alienating its
Ally in in the US uh and if it goes into
Rafa I don't think they really
understand it I know where they're
coming from they they think this is a
bad neighborhood we have to show that
we're tough and we have to deal with
this head on or someone else will have
to deal with it again and we'll take
casualties again so I understand where
they're coming from and I understand
what how they've got un support it but I
understand up to this point to would
agree although I think the collateral
damage problem is terrible uh I but
here's my fear I fear for Israel if they
go in for this in the longer run that's
it and and uh if I was working in
Israeli security be fearful too on your
n just okay but just let NASA pick up on
that and bring and bring her back into
the discussion do you think the Israel
is alienating the West fast enough
because it doesn't seem to be paying any
attention exactly it's not paying any
attention and I think um the West
doesn't really care or at least the
United States is not making any um any
pressure uh that that would really stop
I mean again is just saying yeah make it
lighter with uh with just don't kill too
many people I I think this language and
and so far the behavior of like
supplying uh uh military assistance like
uh like things are totally supported and
and are totally uh normal uh tell us
that unfortunately the US will not be uh
getting uh putting the enough pressure
that we are hoping for and Israel really
doesn't care look at what's happening
after the icj I think we have seen how
the aid flow has decreased significantly
after the icj everything I think
everything that Israel is uh is doing
simply contradicts with any uh any of
these uh pressures or with the
international humanitarian law or any of
that so I wonder if we are now uh saying
this level of of pressure talking about
uh talking about it as if yes uh they
are pressuring them and stopping them
and um no I I think things will
unfortunately uh be uh continue to be
really uh bad and we are losing people
by the minute people are suffering now
going to Rafa where will people go I
have uh friends and relatives there they
they literally ask the question where
are we going do we go up north where
there is all destruction where there is
no food where people are literally dying
are actually dying from Hunger we are
seeing reports of uh deaths of children
out of hunger we know that 15% are uh at
at this risk of famine I mean what what
else is it uh is the world or the US
waiting for I don't know what parameters
are we use I think I think the whole
international law and the the world
system has totally failed and I think
this is not this will be this will have
its implications on any upcoming uh uh
any upcoming situation like this while
tolerate
30,000 people killed and more than
60,000 injured they are unable to find
treatment you are talking about at best
cases 200 trucks entering while in the
past three weeks we have seen up to 40
or 30 trucks or none of of Aid why we
know that the Gaza strips needs at least
500 in in the in the best say scenarios
before this while it's under blockade
for uh 17 years I mean we need bring in
back now because I just want to pick up
on that question of where people will go
we come back to it time and time again
Gaza has been decimated there is nowhere
to go inside especially nowhere safe and
the UN has said it is not going to be
party to any movement of people Force
displacement it called it Abba I want to
ask you what you think of satellite
pictures that we're seeing uh on the
border with Egypt where we see them
preparing a buffer zone where we see
them preparing a walled Camp CYO is
denied that anything is happening there
but does Netanyahu perhaps does the US
even see a route out for Palestinians
via the Raffa Crossing into the Sinai
Peninsula in Egypt Cairo has denied it
unimportantly Laura that they don't want
us talking about it they have uh
actually gone after journalists who have
been revealing the creation of this
buffer zone within Egypt so that's an
important thing to remember but it's
undeniable that it is happening um it
would be a disaster for Egypt which
important to remember that Egypt is also
a key us Ally right biggest Arab country
very close to the American Military the
US has said we will not let this happen
but again we haven't seen the US use its
levers to prevent any broadscale push
into Sinai I still think it's unlikely
um just because Egypt would be extremely
opposed to it um and I think many
Palestinians would be very opposed right
it's important to remember something
like 80% of gazans are themselves
descendants of refugees of of displaced
people they do not want to feel they are
being pushed out of their land yet again
into another foreign space with no
guarantee of when they could return and
I do just want to pick up on the point
about Northern Gaza CU I think that's a
really important Point as well in terms
of the US levers to alleviate this if we
zoom out a little bit the US wants us to
be talking about trucks right 40 trucks
200 trucks 500 trucks and what eight
experts and and even some people in
government are saying is that is just a
deranged measure we cannot be thinking
in those terms let's think a bigger
sense where there are pockets of famine
in Northern Gaza and there are many
entrances through Israel that could be
used to bring in humanitarian Aid if the
US and Israel chose to do that right now
they're not choosing to do that so I
think as looking at Rafa and we and we
think oh can they do this in some kind
of humane way that would take care of
these civilians but allow them to meet
their military objectives the record is
very clear right and and the actual us
leverage in terms of taking care of
Palestinian civilians has not been used
and we aren't seeing any statements from
the US or any openness from the Israeli
side to to let that shape the the
operation and Raa Patrick we know that
the Israeli Army is in the North in the
in central G I mean it's across the
whole of the strip it is still trying to
hold on it's still fighting battles in
the north and other parts of Gaza KH
Unis how give us an idea of how
difficult it is to hold on to an area on
one front whilst launching another
offensive on another does Israel have
the resources to cover the whole of the
STP in a word yes I think it does its
big strategic worry was a Hezbollah
attack from the north and we saw
obviously some fighting but it never
really got to the escalation level of of
Iran activating a proxy in a major
strategic way which would then have
Israel fighting on two fronts that's its
worst case scenario it hasn't had to do
that it's it sent some of its reservist
home and it does have the military uh
Power as were to to take and hold ground
in in in canun Gaza City and down in
rappa the difference is of course
there's going to be some battles this is
now the pockets of resistance that are
left are fighting like an Insurgency you
know they can hide they can blend in
with civilians they're not going to just
stand and fight like they did in in the
early phases and so they're going to
take casualties there's going to be
intermittent battles there's a whole
tunnel Network that they're still
fighting through so but this isn't at
the scale that we saw in the in the in
the initial uh fights of course you know
if you look at actually the way the
casualties have gone it's gone it was
very fast to 15,000 very fast to 20 and
then started to slow down you know in
one way thankfully although it's all too
much you know still I would say just
coming back to the other contributor
about the West you know there it is
growing you've had a US Air Force person
imilate themselves to death outside the
Israeli Embassy yesterday you've had the
BBC leading with stories of Gaz and
families who've lost 103 relatives over
the you know over on their website today
and yesterday day um and you've had the
Dutch refuse you know by law their
courts order them to stop supplying the
Israeli parts for the F35 jet so there
is movement you can say yeah it's not
good enough at the governmental level
you've had Ireland and Spain table
motions about trade deals and and
supplies to Israel too so there's things
happening um but maybe obviously not
enough quick enough n you're a Gaza
resident we've got Netanyahu saying from
day one that he will not stop until he
has total Victory into him total Victory
is the elimination of Hamas I think
there has been a a stepping back in that
rhetoric over the few months and the
acceptance that you simply cannot
eliminate Hamas in Gaza so what do you
think total Victory would look like for
Netanyahu I mean that's a good question
I'm not sure if I have a a very
intelligent answer but as a Palestinian
and as a gazen I think Israel simply uh
wants to control back the Gaza Strip and
wants to control as much as possible
from the Palestinian land and doesn't
really care about any any agreements in
the past or uh or even any of the
Palestinian Authority um you know
channel of negotiation but that's that's
my personal as a Palestinian
unfortunately I'm I'm very worried that
I will never be able to go back and uh
and the same for those who are now uh uh
in in Gaza or are going to seek Refuge I
think that's that's a very it's a very
troubling uh another
1948 kind of scenario in our heads since
since that day uh we were uh ordered to
leave in October
13th AKA how much is the US considering
the day after the war in Gaza what is
the plan for the the governance of the
strip for the rebuilding of the strip is
it focused enough on this
the US plan uh I first broke the news of
this in January the US plan is is very
much focused on an Israel us Saudi
Arabia deal that would allow Saudi
funding to come in maybe some other Arab
states to come in and help reconstruct
Gaza under a Palestinian Authority that
does not include Hamas uh that's that's
what they want um that doesn't mean they
can get there right I mean you've seen
this week uh some reshuffling on the
Palestinian political side that may
towards a new Palestinian government for
the West Bank in Gaza but all of that to
say these are post-war plans and right
now we still don't have a plan to end
the war and to your question from
Netanyahu total Victory I think that's
just not a victory right that that
Israel can claim and I think that's
that's sort of the the issue here right
now is Israeli Society is so fractured
uh Netanyahu himself is so alienated
angry right and desperate to cling on to
power that I don't know when we can get
get Israel turning around and saying
okay we're done so while postwar
conversations are happening I think you
could get some sort of veneer of
stability you've swn the seeds of huge
instability to come and and this goal of
eradicating Hamas as you mentioned even
the Israelis have kind of drawn back
from that right now they're saying we're
not eradicating we're just degrading
right and okay and and then what you do
right sort of three years down the line
when when they are resurging they've
already been resurging amid the war when
there are Israeli forces in Gaza
and I don't think that planning is
happening yet in Washington or Tel okay
it's been a really interesting
discussion today thank you very much
everyone for joining us akar Shahid
Ahmed NAA shawa and Patrick
buy and thank you too for watching you
can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website that's aljazera
docomo go to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ Inside Story you can
also join the conversation on X our
handle is at AJ insid story from me
Laura Kyle and the whole team here it's
bye for
[Music]
now